ftp (file transfer protol),,early way for transferring files over the Internet Users used FTP programs to connect to servers; look at listings of available documents; and download documents of interest
World wide web (the web),,Convenient way for computers to communicate files over the internet; created by Tim Berners-Lee in the early 1990s; contained three things: 1. text files (HTML) containing links to other text files 2. A program known as a browser for viewing HTML files 3. A set of rules known as the HTTP protocol for transferring HTML files among computers
web page,,a document that is viewed in a web browser
website,,collection of related web pages
web server,,program that serves web pages to web browsers
HyperText markup language (HTML),,standard markup language for web documents
HyperText,,text that has links to other texts (and today to images videos and more)
markup,,in HTML; special markings in the document that provide additional information to links formatting and images
The period when the web was first developed,,Early 1990s
browser,,a program for viewing web pages
HTTP,,the protocol for transferring files among computers via the web
When was the first website published?,,1991
How many websites existed in 2001?,,30 million
How many websites existed in 2011?,,350 million
In what year did the number of Internet users surpass 3 billion?,, 2015
web browser,,program that downloads an HTML document from a web server;displays the document to the user with the appropriate formatting and allows the user to interact with the document
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C),, international standards organization that traditionally has controlled a number of web standards including HTML; HTML5 was the latest HTML standard released by the W3C in 2014
WHATWG (Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Grou),,In 2019 W3C relinquished HTML standards to WHATWG; an organization that develops a variety web standards and whose members include the major browser vendors; produces the HTML Living Standard- continually evolving standard without versio numbers that replaces HTML5
The year the idea for generating links from within one document to other documents,,1945
The year the term HyperText invented,,1965
The year the first web browser is created,,1990
The year the World Wide WEb Consortium (W3C) creatd,,1994
The year HTML 2.0 standard published,,1995
The year HTML5 standard published,,2014
The year WHATWG controls the HTML standard,,2019
A modern web page is composed of HTML CSS and JavaScript. What are each of their purposes?,,HTML defines the structure and content of a web page; CSS specifies the layout and visible appearance; JavaScript describes the dynamic behaviors and actions of a web page
packet,,contains To and From IP addresses- the information to communicate and other configuration information
ip-address (internet protocol address),, a computer's unique address on the internet (like a house's unique address in the world); usually represented numerically like 198.51.100.7. A typical IP address is 32 bits-divided into 8-bit groups- each group often written as a decimal number
IPv4 and IPv6,,IPv4 is original Internet protocol- has 32 bit addresses (4 billion unique addresses)--newer version IPv6 uses 128 bit addresses-capable of 3.4 * 10^38 addresses. IPv4 and IPv6 currently co-exist and likely will for a long time
domain name,,name for an IP address such as the name wikipedia.org for the ip address 198.35.26.96; the name is easier to remember and type; capitalization of the domain name does not matter
DNS Server (Domain Name System),,When a computer sends a packet using a domain name over the Internet the first step is to contact a DNS server to conver the domain name to an IP address; the thirteen main DNS servers are called root servers
top-level domains (TLD),, .com ; .net ; .org ; .edu ; .gov ; each country is assigned with unique two-letter country code top-level domain (ccTLD) like .uk (United Kingdom) or .ru (Russia); ICANN-the organization that manages TLDs now allows companies and organizations to create customized TLDs like .church ; .pizza ; and .music
second-level domain,, such as wikipedia in wikipedia.org - a second-level domain is commonly an organization's name as in Stanford.edu (the second-level domain name is Stanford);
third-level domain,,third-level and further level domains reer to sub-computer systems local to an orgnaization (cs.stanford.edu ; the Computer Science department at Stanford); A common third-or-deeper-level domain is www- short for World Wide Web- usually referring to an organization's web server
URL (Uniform Resource Locator),,the location of a web resource on the web such as http://cdc.gov/alcohol/faqs.htm
web resource,,any retrrievable item- like an HTML file- image; video; CSS style sheet; etc.
a URL is composed of these parts,,scheme; hostname; and path
scheme,,characters at the beginning of a URL followed by a colon ":" or a colon and double slashes "://". Common URL schemes include http ; https ; mailto ; and file
hostname,,The complete domain name following the scheme in a URL. Ex: In http://www.cdc.gov/alcohol - the hostname is "www.cdc.gov"
path,,all characters to the right of the hostname in a URL - Ex: in http://www.cdc.gov/alcohol - the path is "/alcohol
web page errors,,1. if the domain name is not found by a DNS server a page is displayed indicated such as "Sorry,, the website www.zzaya.blah cannot be found" 2. A domain name may exist but the web server may not respond. A message like "The website is not responding or "could not reach the website" - non-response could be due to web server being runed off or undergoing maintenance 3. If a web server is reached but the speific requested page isn't found the server returns a 404 status code (Page not Found)
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP),, a protocol suite that governs how data packets are transferred over the internet from one machine to another.
HTTP versions,,HTTP/1.1 : standard used for most of the web's lifetime. HTTP/2 : many websites are adopting new HTTP standards that speeds up the transfer of information between web browsers and web servers. HTTP/3: in development - improves the speed of HTTP/2 by using UDP to transport data packets instead of TCP
DNS lookup,, sending the domain name to the local DNS and getting back the IP address of the web-server hosting the domain name
HTTP request,, a message sent from the web browser to the web server. Often the request asks the web server to send back a web resource like an HTML file; image; CSS style shee; JavaScript file; or video
HTTP response,, a message sent from the web server back to the web browser in response to an HTTP request. Often the response contains the requested web resource.
An HTTP request and an HTTP response are both composed of four parts,,1. Status line- the status line specifies the HTTP version being used. A request status line includes a request type and path; a response status line includes a status code. 2. Zero or more header fields- A header field is a keyword followed by a colon and a value. Header fields supply additional information about the request or response. 3. Empty line. 4. Optional message body- A message body contains data being transferred between a web browser and web server. In a request the message body may be empty or contain submitted form data. In a response the message body may contain the requested resource.
Content-Length,,number of bytes in the response's message body.
Content-Type,,Media type of the response's message body.
Date,,Datetime the response was generated by the web server.
Last-Modified,,Datetime the requested resource was last modified on the web server
Server,,Identifies the web server software that generated the response
Host,,The domain name for the requested path
User-Agent,,Identifies the browser making the request.
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA),,a standards organization that manages various internet numbers and symbols like global IP address allocation; root zone management in DNS; and media types. IANA maintains a list of HTTP headers that are currently active; obsolete; or experimental
Chrome's developer tools (DevTools),,Web browsers contain built-in developer tools. Press Ctrl+Shift+I (Windows) or Command+Option+I (Mac). The network tab shows the HTTP network traffic when accessing Wikipedia's article on World Wide Web - When a developer clicks on a specific request- the details of that request-response are displayed
GET,,request method: request a representation of the specified resource
HEAD,,request method: request a response identical to GET (request a representation of the specified resource) but without the response body
POST,,request method: request the web server to accept the message body enclosed in the request as a new resource
PUT,,request method: request the web server to accept the message body enclosed in the request as a modification of an existing resource
DELETE,,request method: request the web server to delete the existing resource
Status code: 200,,OK; Standard response for a successful request
Status code: 301,,Moved Permanently; The resource should always be requested at a different URL
Status code: 302,,Found; The resource should temporarily be requested at a different URL
Status code: 304,,Not Modified; The resource has not been modified since the last time the resource was requested
Status code: 403,,Forbidden; The web browser does not have permission to access the resource
Status code: 404,,Not Found; The resource could not be located
Status code: 500,,Internal Server Error; Something unexpected happened on the web server
URL shortening,,a technique to create shorter URLs that redirect to long URLs. Ex: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URL_shortening has a short URl of http://tinyurl.com/urlwiki. Short URLs aare convenient for sharing on social media-especially on Twitter where the number of characters in a post is limited. Common URL shortening services include bit.ly; rebrandly.com; and tinyurl.com
Which request method is used by the browser to get the same response headers that a GET would generate but without the message body?,,HEAD
Which request method is used by the browser to submit web form data to the server?,,POST
Which status code is sent when the web server wants to redirec tthe browser to a different URL?,,301 or 302
Which status code is sent when the request URL does not point to an existing resource on the web server?,,404
Which status code is sent when the web browser is denied permission to the requested URL?,,403
Browser cache,, an area on the computer's disk where web content can be stored by the web browser for quick retrieval later. By caching web content,, browsers can reduce the amount of network traffic required to display previously visited web pages.
entity tag (ETag),, an identifier for a specific version of a web resource. Ex: 34905a3e285dd11. When the resouce changes- so should the ETag in the request with an If-None-Match header.
Which status code is sent when the web server compares the cached ETag with the server's ETag for the request web resource; and the two ETags are identical?,,304 - when the ETags are equal- the web browser has an up-to-date cached copy of the web resource
Does a 304 response generally contain a message body?,,No; 304 indicates the cached content is up-to-date; so resending the same content to the browser is unnecessary.
Do web servers always generate ETags for all web resources?,,No; ETags are not often produced for dynamic web content.
Where can the HTTP header field If-None-Match be found?,,HTTP request; the browser sends the If-None-Maatch header field with the ETag to the web server in the HTTP request
If-Modified-Since,,(Other caching mechanisms): used with the Last-Modified date/time to request the web server only send the requested resource if the resource has changed since the specified date/time. Ex: "If-Modified-Since Wed 01 Sep 2019 13:24:52 GMT" asks the web server to send the resource if the resource was modified after Sep 1 2019 at 13:24:52 GMT.
Expires,,(Other caching mechanisms): contains a date/time indicating when the requested resource is considered "stale". Ex: "Expires: Wed 01 Sep 2019 13:24:52 GMT" tells the web browser to show the cached resource until Sep 1 2019 at 13:24:52 GMT.
Cache-Control,,(other caching mechanisms): used to specify a number of caching directives. Ex: "Cache-Control: no store" tells the web browser to never cache the requested resource; and "Cache-Control: max-age=180" tells the web browser to cache the resource for 180 seconds.
network sniffer,,software that monitors network traffic and allows users to inspect HTTP requests and responses.
HTTPS,,encyrpts HTTP traffic between a browser and web server so a netowkr sniffer cannot intercept sensitive information in the HTTP traffic like passwords; credit card numbers; financial transactions; etc.
Transport Layer Security (TLS),,HTTPS uses a protocol called Transport Layer Security (TLS) which uses asymmetric public keys to encrypt data between the browser and web server. A website wanting to use HTTPS must acquire a digital certificate- issued by a trusted certificate authority; that contains a public key used by TLS to encrypt data.
Steps used in an HTTPS transaction in order,,Step 1: Browser requests an HTTPS connection to a web page (The URL must begin with "https://") Step 2: Web server sends digital certificate to the browser (The browser warns the user if the digital certificate is not from a trusted certificate authority) Step 3: The browser and web server initiate "TLS handshake". (The browser and web server use the TLS handshake to generate session keys used to encrypt and decrypt information. A "handshake" is a networking term that means two participants communicate back and forth in order to negotiate a solution) Step 4: The browser and web server transmit encrypted information. (The encrypted information can only be decrypted by the browser and web server.
T/F: Because Chrone is by far the leading browser worldwide- testing a web page only really needs to be done using Chome,,False: A web page should work equally well for any commonly-used browser.
T/F: Web developers typically create web pages using new features available exclusively on a particular browser,,False: New features can add additional functionality or visual appeal to a web page. However the extra effort required to incorporate the browser-specific features while simultaneously ensuring that the page works well on other browsers is hard to justify
T/F: Web developers can sometimes ignore really old web browsers,,True: Every browser eventually reaches obsolescence and can be ignored when developing typical sites.
Developers of mobile-friendly web pages need to consider the following things,,Screen size; Load speed; Device speed; data cost; battery life; interface
Mobile first,,A web development approach that advocates first creating a reduced-feature version of a website for mobile users. Then the developer creates a full-featured website for visitors using desktop computers
Screen size,,Physical dimension in pixels of a device's screen
Affordances,,Visual clues that guide the user in figuring out how to use an app
Responsive web design,,a web design approach that creates web pages that automatically move and resize parts depending on the display size and orientation
Internet of Things (IoT),,the global collection of communicating devices that sense and control technology on behalf of humans. IoT devices range from a simple temperature sensor to a satellite-based laser scanner used to discover archaeological sites hidden by vegetation.
IoT devices display one or more of the following,,1. Gather information about the physical world using sensors. (Temperature; voltage; images) 2. Share the sensor data with control systems (ex: a sensor may report a room's temperature to building control system or air ozone and water pollution sensors reporting air quality data to urban environment monitoring systems) 3. Interact with hardware to execute commands sent by control systems (ex: speed up fan  moving hot air to part of a building where the sensed temperature is below the target temperature)
Could the following statements be true about an IoT-based system used to monitor a swimming pool for a pool service company? 1. A technician installs devices that measure and report water chemical concentrations; water leve; pump status; and water flow through the filter system.,,True; these sensors are standard in automated pool maintenance systems.
Could the following statements be true about an IoT-based system used to monitor a swimming pool for a pool service company? 2. The pool control system periodically transmits summary data over the Internet to a pool service company's web server.,,True; a number of systems exist for reporting sensor data to Interner-based servers.
Could the following statements be true about an IoT-based system used to monitor a swimming pool for a pool service company? 3. The pool company would have to send a technician to the pool to change the control system settings.,,False; IoT-based control systems can be built so that a technician can access and modify system settings via a web page from anywhere on the Internet.
Could the following statements be true about an IoT-based system used to monitor a swimming pool for a pool service company? 4. The pool company will not know that the water level is too low unless the customer calls or someone happens to check the system status web page.,,False; When the company server receives data indicating that the water level is dangerously low; the server can create an entry in the problem-reporting-system. Email and text messages can be automatically sent if the problem is not responded to quickly enough.
Could the following statements be true about an IoT-based system used to monitor a swimming pool for a pool service company? 5. If the customer notices the low water level and calls; the company receptionist's browser can have the customer's pool status web page loaded by the time the receptionist answers the phone.,,True; The caller's phone number can be sent to the server and used to load the caller's pool status web page automatically.
Could the following statements be true about an IoT-based system used to monitor a swimming pool for a pool service company? 6. After the customer reports the water level; the receptionist could inform the caller that a service technician was already dispatched and was six minutes from arriving at the house.,,True; the web page could show which technician had been automatically dispatched by the problem reporting system. IoT devices in the technician's vehicle; such as GPs; can be used to show the vehicle location and predict arrival time.
web accessibility,,the ability of users with disabilities to access and use a web page with reasonable effort.
Really small businesses are exempt from web accessibility requirements,,False; although some laws only apply to companies that provide services to federal and local government; nearly all businesses that serve the public must meet ADA provisions requiring effective communication with the disabled.
Color blindness is so rare that web developers do not have to consider the issue when selecting colors for a web page,,False; approximately 8% of men worldwide have some form of color blindness. The most common form of color blindness is the inability to distinguish between red and green.
A random website is more likely to have a visitor with low vision than a visitor who is totally blind.,,True; world-wide; between three and ten times more people suffer from very low vision than suffer from total blindness.
Unlike the blind; people who are deaf do not need specia laccommodation for websites.,,False; although someone who is deaf can read a web page just as well as the non-deaf; captions and transcripts are needed to help the deaf understand the increasing amount of video and multimedia content on web pages.
Cognitive computing,,the use of artificial intelligence techniques and access to vast amounts of data to simulate human problem solving in complex situations with ambiguity;changing data; and even conflicting information.
Which browser lost the most market share between 2010 and 2019?,,Internet Explorer
In what year did web browsing first become more likely on mobile rather than desktop?,,2016
Are human doctors or IBM's Watson more likely to keep up with new medical information in the future?,,IBM's Watson.
Tag,,descriptive name surrounded by < and > characters that web browser uses to display content.
Link,,on a web page is a clickable item that causes the web browser to jump to another web page when clicked.
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS),,a textual language for describing how a web page is styled for visual presentation. CSS controls the look and layout of web page content.
CSS rule,,specifies styling properties for specific HTML elements. CSS rules may be placed within <style> tags in the HTML file's head part. Each rule indicates the element to be styled like h1 (header1) or p (paragraph); followed by a list in braces {} of property:value items like color:blue
JavaScript,,a programming language that runs in a browser; enabling web pages supporting actions like responding to a button click. JavaScript can be included in the HTML's file's head or body parts.
<h1 id="Colorable">...,,Gives this h1 heading a label- so that a function can find the heading to change the heading's color.
onclick="changeTextColor('white')",,indicated that the JavaScript function changeTextColor() should be executed-with the value 'white'.
x = document.getElementById("Colorable"),,Finds the element with id 'Colorable'- and sets x to that element. x can then be used to change that element's attributes- like color.
<button type="button" onclick="changeTextColor('blue')>Blue</button>,,The HTML that should be added to create a third button.