pie chart,,circle is drawn w/ a slice of pie representing each category % of observations. All percentages should add to 100%. Pie charts make it difficult to compare categories to each other.
bar graph,,a bar is drawn for each category with the bars height representing the % or count of observation. Bar graphs compare the sizes of each group of categorial variable - easier to read bar graph than pie graph.
point of graphical summaries,,help us visualize features of distribution for quantitative variables: overall shape and pattern, center and spread, outliers
Stem and leaf plot,,each observation represented by a "stem" and a "leaf". The stem is the one or more of the leading digits, and the leaf is the final digit.
histogram,,break up the range of values of a variable into classes and display the count (or percent) of the observations that fall into each class.
unimodal, symmetric,,shape distribution - curve peak is in the middle and generally equal on both ends of the curve.
unimodal, right-skewed,,shape distribution - curve peak on LEFT side of representation
unimodal, left-skewed,,shape distribution - curve peak on RIGHT side of representation
bimodel,,shape distribution, contains two different 'peaks'
uniform,,shape distribution, rectangular distribution
numerical summaries purpose,,provide precice descriptions of the characteristics of distribution
mean,,the average of all observation (x with a - above it)
median,,denoted M, the middle number when measurements are ordered from smallest to largest
range,,difference between largest and smallest observations. Bad: calculates using the most extreme values of dataset. Good: simple measure of spread
Percentile,, pth percentile of a distribution is the value below which p% of the observations fail
first quartile (Q1),,25th percentile. Lowest of the 25% of the data lies below Q1. Q1: median of the observations below M.
second quartile (Q2),,50th percentile = median. 50% of the data are below and 50% are above M.
third quartile (Q3),,75th percentile. Highest 25% of the data lies above Q3. Q3: median of the observations above M.
interquartile range (IQR),,the difference between the first and third quartiles. IQR = Q3 - Q1. The larger IQR, the more spread out the data is. IQR is resistant to outliers, since it is caluclated using only the middle 50% of data set.
5-number summary,,a brief description of the center and spread of a distribution. Gives minimum, Q1, M, Q3, and maximum
boxplot,,a plot of the 5-number summary. They give us a picture of center and spread, also idea as to the shape of skewness of distribution.
What does right-skewed imply about the mean and median?,,mean > median
What does left-skewed imply about the mean and meidan?,,mean < median
What does symmetric imply about the mean and median?,,mean = median
side-by-side boxplots,,boxplots for more than one distribution. They allow us to compare the centers and spreads of different distribution
variance (s^2),,a set of observations is the 'average' of the squared deviations from the other
standard deviation (s),,distance that a 'tyical' observation falls from mean. S is measured in the same units as the original observations. s>=0. The larger the standard deviation, the greater spread of the data. Not resistant to outliers
role of probability,,complementary, understand the rudiments of uncertainty in samples to be able to learn about the population.
