statistics,,the science of collecting, organizing, interpreting, and learning from data
aspects of statistics,,design: planning how to obtain data to answer the question of interest, description: summarizing the data that is obtained, inference: using sample data to learn about the population.
population,,a collection of units of interest (adults in Minneapolis, shoes from a factory)
sample,,a subset of the units of a population
subjects,,the individual units of a population (an adult, a shoe)
statistical inference,,the procedure of using a sample to learn about a population
statistic,,a number that describes a sample. It can be computed from the data, known.
parameter,,often unknown number that describes the population
how do we know if a sample is good?,,the sample should be representative of the population. This means that it should be possible to sample every unit of the population. 
variables,,explanatory variables(independent variable), response variable(dependent variable) (ex: if we measured mother's height and daughter's height:: explanatory var: mother's height, response var: daughter's height)
experimental study,,a researcher conducts an experiment by assigning subjects to certian experimental conditions and then observing outcomes on the response variable. The experimental conditions are called 'treatments'
observational study,,the researcher observes values of the response variable and explanatory variables for the sample subjects, without anything being done to the subjects (such as imposing a treatment)
retrospective study: the researcher uses strictly historical data, data taken over a specific period of time.
sampling frame,,list of subjects in the population from which the sample is taken, ideally it lists the entire population of interest.
sampling design,,determines how the sample is selected.
variable,,any characteristic of a subject in a population
simple random sampling (srs),,best way of obtaining a sample that is repreentative of the population.
bias,,when certain outcomes will occur more often in a sample than they do in a population
response bias,,occurs when the subject gives an incorrect response (perhaps lying) or the way the interviewer asks the questions are confusing or misleading
convenience sample,,a type of survey that is easy to obtain
volunteer sample,,most common form of convenience sample, volunteers do not tend to be representative of entire population
